outreach/index.md, before:

@def title = "Outreach"

# Outreach

## Shapes: Patterns in Art and Sciences

[![Shapes psoster](/assets/2025.01_SHAPES_Poster.jpg)](https://epfl-pavilions.ch/en/exhibitions/shapes)

From January 2025 until March 2025 Michael Herbst co-organises an exhibition
[**Shapes: Patterns in Art and Science**](https://epfl-pavilions.ch/en/exhibitions/shapes)
at the EPFL Pavilions.

Our collection explores the richness of the natural and artificial patterns
that surround us. Bringing together art, mathematics, materials science and
biology, it highlights the shared fascination of scientists and artists with
geometric, dynamic and symmetrical structures.
The event is co-organised
in collaboration with two fellow mathematicians,
[Hugo Parlier](https://math.uni.lu/parlier/) and [Marc Troyanov](https://people.epfl.ch/marc.troyanov),
as well as help from colleagues in physics, biology and the EPFL Pavilion team.

For more information on the exhibition,
see [the EPFL Pavilions website](https://epfl-pavilions.ch/en/exhibitions/shapes).

Commit message:

Link to symposium and radio coverage

outreach/index.md, after:

@def title = "Outreach"

# Outreach

## Shapes: Patterns in Art and Sciences

[![Shapes psoster](/assets/2025.01_SHAPES_Poster.jpg)](https://epfl-pavilions.ch/en/exhibitions/shapes)

From January 2025 until March 2025 Michael Herbst co-organised an exhibition
[**Shapes: Patterns in Art and Science**](https://epfl-pavilions.ch/en/exhibitions/shapes)
at the EPFL Pavilions.

Our collection explores the richness of the natural and artificial patterns
that surround us. Bringing together art, mathematics, materials science and
biology, it highlights the shared fascination of scientists and artists with
geometric, dynamic and symmetrical structures.
The event is co-organised
in collaboration with two fellow mathematicians,
[Hugo Parlier](https://math.uni.lu/parlier/) and [Marc Troyanov](https://people.epfl.ch/marc.troyanov),
as well as help from colleagues in physics, biology and the EPFL Pavilion team.

We also organised a **[scientific symposium](https://epfl-pavilions.ch/en/events/shapes-symposium)** with discussions between **scientists, artists and mathematicians**.
As part of the symposium Michael lead a **panel discussing**
the **interaction of art, scientific visualisation and science** as a whole.
The discussion has been recorded live and
can be [[watched using this youtube link]](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q1bKNmgQz5w&t=17940s).


The exhibition has been **covered multiple times** by the **Swiss public radio channel RTS**:
  - On 5th Feb 2025 a [10-minute segment](https://www.rts.ch/audio-podcast/2025/audio/une-exposition-pour-mettre-en-valeur-la-beaute-des-mathematiques-28780656.html) in the RTS CQFD podcast.
    [[download link]](https://www.rts.ch/audio-podcast/2025/audio/une-exposition-pour-mettre-en-valeur-la-beaute-des-mathematiques-28780656.html)
  - On 6th Feb 2025 a [14-minute special](https://www.rts.ch/audio-podcast/2025/audio/des-casse-tetes-mathematiques-rigolos-et-colores-mis-au-point-a-l-epfl-28782083.html) about the mathematical puzzles Hugo Parlier and Paul Turner developed and are part of the exhibition. [[download link]](https://www.rts.ch/audio-podcast/2025/audio/des-casse-tetes-mathematiques-rigolos-et-colores-mis-au-point-a-l-epfl-28782083.html)
  - On 11th Feb 2025 a [6-minute segment](https://www.rts.ch/audio-podcast/2025/audio/formes-les-motifs-dans-l-art-et-la-science-une-exposition-a-voir-a-l-epfl-28788057.html) in RTS Vertigo. [[download link]](https://www.rts.ch/audio-podcast/2025/audio/formes-les-motifs-dans-l-art-et-la-science-une-exposition-a-voir-a-l-epfl-28788057.html)

For more information on the exhibition,
see [the EPFL Pavilions website](https://epfl-pavilions.ch/en/exhibitions/shapes).
